 
 
 
 Enterprise 
Technology 
Governance & Risk 
Management 
Framework for 
Financial Institutions 
 
Issued vide BPRD Circular No. 05 dated May 30, 2017 
 
 
Banking Policy & Regulations Department 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
2 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
Table of Contents 
ABBREVIATIONS/ACRONYMS ................................................................................................. 4 
PREAMBLE ............................................................................................................................... 5 
1. INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY GOVERNANCE IN FI(s) ..................................................... 7 
1.1 Technology Governance Framework ................................................................................ 7 
1.2 IT Strategy ........................................................................................................................ 8 
1.3 Digital Strategy ................................................................................................................. 8 
1.4 Roles and Responsibilities ................................................................................................ 8 
1.5 Organizational Structure ..................................................................................................10 
1.6  Policies, Standards and Procedures ...............................................................................11 
1.7   Management Information System (MIS).........................................................................12 
1.8   Capacity Building/Training .............................................................................................12 
2. INFORMATION SECURITY ..................................................................................................13 
2.1  Information/Cyber Security Management Framework .....................................................13 
2.2   Identification and prioritization of Information System Assets .........................................13 
2.3 Information Security Risk Management ...........................................................................14 
2.4 Security Controls Implementation ....................................................................................14 
2.5 Cyber Security Action Plan ..............................................................................................16 
2.6 Incident Reporting ...........................................................................................................17 
2.7 Security Requirements and Testing .................................................................................17 
2.8 Risk Monitoring and Reporting .........................................................................................18 
2.9 Threat Intelligence and Industry Collaboration .................................................................19 
3. IT SERVICES DELIVERY & OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT ...............................................20 
3.1 IT Service Management Framework ................................................................................20 
3.2 Preventive Maintenance Plan (PMP) ...............................................................................20 
3.3 Event and Problem Management ....................................................................................20 
3.4 Patch Management .........................................................................................................21 
3.5 Capacity Planning ............................................................................................................21 
3.6 Data Center .....................................................................................................................22 
3.7 User Support/Help Desk ..................................................................................................22 
4. ACQUISITION & IMPLEMENTATION OF IT SYSTEMS .......................................................23 
4.1. Technology Projects Management Framework ...............................................................23 
4.2 System Development and Acquisition Framework ...........................................................23 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
3 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
4.3 Outsourcing of IT Services ..............................................................................................28 
4.4 Cloud Computing .............................................................................................................28 
5. BUSINESS CONTINUITY AND DISASTER RECOVERY .....................................................30 
5.1. Business Continuity and Disaster Recovery Framework .................................................30 
5.2 Business Continuity Planning Process .............................................................................30 
5.3 Disaster Recovery ...........................................................................................................32 
6. IT AUDIT ...............................................................................................................................34 
6.1.   IT Audit Program ..........................................................................................................34 
6.2   Scope of IT Audit ...........................................................................................................34 
6.3   Reporting Methodology ..................................................................................................34 
6.4   Post-closing/Monitoring Activities...................................................................................35 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
4 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
ABBREVIATIONS/ACRONYMS 
ASR 
Application System Review  
AUP 
Acceptable Use Policy 
BCP 
Business Continuity Plan 
BIA 
Business Impact Analysis 
BoD 
Board of Directors 
BRD 
Business Requirement Document  
CIO 
Chief Information Officer 
CISO 
Chief Information Security Officer 
COBIT 
Control Objectives for Information Technology 
CSP 
Cloud Service Provider  
DFIs 
Development Finance Institutions 
DR 
Disaster Recovery 
DRP 
Disaster Recovery Planning 
FI(s) 
Financial Institution/Institutions 
HVAC 
Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning  
ICT 
Information & Communication Technologies 
ID 
Identity (user identity) 
IS 
Information Systems/Information Security 
ISO 
International Standards Organization 
ITIL 
Information Technology Infrastructure Library 
IT1 
Information Technology 
ITT 
Invitations-To-Tender 
KYC/CDD 
Know Your Customer/Customer Due Diligence 
MFBs 
Microfinance Banks 
MIS 
Management Information System 
PPRA  
Public Procurement Regulatory Authority 
RFP 
Request for Proposals 
RPO 
Recovery Point Objective 
RTO 
Recovery Time Objectives  
SBP 
State Bank of Pakistan 
SLA 
Service Level Agreement  
SOPs 
Standard Operating Procedures 
TSP 
Technology Service Provider 
UAT 
User Acceptance Testing  
UPS 
Uninterruptible Power Supply 
USB  
Universal Serial Bus 
VA 
Vulnerability Assessment 
                                                          
1  *’IT’ and ‘technology’ are used interchangeably in this document. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
5 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
PREAMBLE 
The evolving role of technology and automation in the banking/financial services sector has 
become increasingly complex. A growing number of financial institutions2 (FIs) employ the 
advances in technology as leverage to offer innovative products, deliver fast and efficient 
service at affordable prices and venture into new markets. Moreover, technology drives the 
efficiency of operations and financial soundness of these institutions by improving overall 
decision-making process. As technology becomes an integral part of the business and 
operations of FIs, such technology usage and dependence, if not properly managed, may 
heighten various risks. With a vision to provide baseline technology governance and risk 
management principles to the financial institutions, SBP has developed the framework on 
‘Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management in Financial Institutions’. The 
framework is aimed to enable FIs to keep abreast with the aggressive and widespread adoption 
of technology in the financial services industry and consequently strengthen existing regulatory 
framework for technology risk supervision. This framework shall be integrated with the FI(s)' 
overall enterprise risk management program. SBP expects FI(s) to have the knowledge and 
skills necessary to understand and effectively manage technology risks. The framework is 
broadly based on international standards and recognized principles of international best 
practices.  
Purpose and Scope — The framework aims to provide enabling regulatory environment for 
managing risks associated with the acquisition, development, deployment and use of 
technology and shall serve as SBP's baseline requirements for all FI(s). The instructions are 
focused on enhancing the proactive and reactive environments in FI(s) to various facets and 
dimensions of technology including information security, technology operations, audit, business 
continuity, project/performance management and related domains. FI(s) shall adopt an 
integrated risk management approach to identify, measure, monitor and control technology 
risks. While implementing various aspects of this framework, FI(s) shall exercise sound 
judgment in determining applicable provisions relevant to their technology risk profile. 
Applicability — The framework shall apply to all FI(s) which includes commercial banks 
(public and private sector banks), Islamic banks, Development Finance Institutions (DFIs) and 
Microfinance Banks (MFBs). The framework is not "one-size-fits-all" and implementation of the 
same need to be risk-based and commensurate with size, nature and types of products and 
services and complexity of technology operations of the individual FI(s). The FI(s) shall assess 
and conduct a gap analysis between their current status & this framework and draw a time-
bound action plan to address the gaps and comply with the guidelines in this framework. The 
FI(s) shall upgrade their systems, controls and procedures to ensure compliance with this 
framework latest by June 30, 2018. 
Status of Previous Regulatory Instructions — This framework shall supersede the 
following SBP instructions as issued from time to time. . 
                                                          
2 Financial Institutions’ refers to all banks including Commercial banks (public/private sector banks), 
Islamic banks, Development Finance Institutions (DFIs) and Microfinance Banks (MFBs) 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
6 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
- Guidelines on Information Technology Security issued vide BSD Circular No. 15 of 2004  
- Guidelines on Business Continuity Planning issued vide BSD Circular No. 13 of 2004 
- BCP Guidelines (Annexure – B) issued vide BSD Circular No. 03 of 2007 
- Information Systems: Guidelines on Audits and System Switchover Planning issued vide 
BSD Circular No. 08 of 2005 
- Prevention against Cyber Attacks issued vide BPRD Circular No. 07 of 2016 
 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
7 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
1. INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY GOVERNANCE IN FI(s) 
Technology governance is an integral part of financial institutions (FIs)' corporate governance 
framework consisting of the leadership and organizational structures to ensure the alignment of 
IT strategy with business strategy, optimization of resources, value delivery and performance 
measurement to achieve business objectives and effective technology risk management. It is 
now recognized that technology plays a pivotal role in improving corporate governance and in 
this context, the need to govern technology and technology-enabled business developments 
have never been so greater.  
 
A comprehensive enterprise technology governance framework based on prudent practices can 
help FI(s) in better development of innovative products and services by enabling them to 
manage technology issues and identify, measure, mitigate, monitor and report technology-
based risks and threats. The underlying principle for an enterprise technology governance 
framework is that technology requirements of an institution follow a pre-defined process that 
begins with a business need and ends with a technology solution that conforms to the policies 
approved by the board of directors and senior management. As such, technology governance is 
an ongoing activity that shall not be considered a one-time effort in the fast-changing technology 
environment. 
 
Technology governance aims at fully aligning technology and business strategies with each 
other so that technology risks are identified and controlled as part of the enterprise risk 
management process. It spans the culture, organizational policies and procedures which 
provide oversight and transparency to optimize the costs and enable trust, teamwork and 
confidence in the use of technology itself and the people trusted with technology services. 
Therefore, the processes for technology governance need to be integrated with the FI(s)’ overall 
corporate governance framework. 
 
 
1.1 Technology Governance Framework 
a) The Board of Directors of the FI(s) are responsible to establish a comprehensive 
enterprise 
technology 
governance 
framework 
which 
defines 
the 
leadership, 
organizational structures and processes to ensure that the FI(s)’ technology sustains 
and extends the enterprise’s strategies and objectives. 
b) The primary objective of the technology governance framework is to evaluate the current 
and future use of technology, direct the preparation and implementation of plans and 
policies to ensure that use of technology meets business objectives and monitor 
compliance to policies and performance against the plans. 
c) The basic principles of strategic alignment of IT and the business, value delivery to 
businesses, risk management, resource management (including project management) 
and performance management shall form the basis of this technology governance 
framework. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
8 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
d) Technology governance framework shall be closely aligned with FI(s)’s corporate 
governance framework and shall cover, among other things, policies and procedures to 
provide oversight and transparency in the use of technology. 
e) FI(s) are encouraged to adopt relevant aspects of international standards/best practices 
for effective and efficient enterprise technology governance. 
1.2 IT Strategy 
a) The BoD shall approve “IT Strategy” covering overall design and plan of its operational 
framework including its vision and mission, stakeholders, business, work flow and 
processes, data processing, system access, adoption of best-in-class information 
security systems, practices and availability of IT resources.  
 
b) The FI(s) shall identify any organizational/environmental/cultural constraints and 
enablers to achieve the strategic IT objectives. Further, the FI(s) shall also put in place a 
strategic review process to ensure that the “IT Strategy” remains relevant with the 
organizational strategies and direction to achieve business objectives.  
1.3 Digital Strategy 
The board shall also approve a “Digital Strategy” covering, at least the following objectives:- 
a) Development of customer focused digital products and services. 
b) End to end digitization of processes for delivery of digital products and services. 
c) Interoperability of delivery channels. 
1.4 Roles and Responsibilities   
1.4.1 Board of Directors 
The Board of Directors (BoD) sets the tone and direction for an FI(s) use of technology. BoD, at 
minimum, shall perform the following:- 
a) Review and approve an IT governance framework to ensure that organization’s IT 
supports and enables the achievement of the corporate strategies and objectives.  
b) Review and approve “IT Strategy” and “Digital Strategy” in line with the business 
strategy of the bank and monitor & update the same on regular basis keeping in view 
potential opportunities and threats. 
c) Establish an efficient and effective IT organization structure in line with the IT 
governance framework. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
9 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
d) Ensure that technology risks are integrated with the enterprise risk management function 
to achieve security, reliability, resiliency, interoperability and recoverability of 
data/information and information assets. 
e) Approve all technology-related policies and review the same periodically in light of major 
technological/regulatory developments at least after every three (03) years.  
f) Ensure maintenance of an independent and effective technology audit function 
commensurate with the complexity of FI(s) technology risk profile. 
g) Ensure that resource gaps (people, process & technology) identified by the management 
are adequately and timely fulfilled. 
 
h) Ensure that the skills required for technology governance, service delivery, information 
security and risk management are sufficient and up-to-date. 
 
i) Approve and receive periodic updates on major technology-related projects that may 
have significant impact on FI(s)’ operations, earnings or capital. Further, the board shall 
also define the criteria for major projects.  
1.4.2 Senior Management 
The senior management, at a minimum, shall:- 
a) Implement “IT strategy” and “Digital Strategy” approved by the BoD.  
b) Monitor implementation of the technology governance program and assess its 
effectiveness on business lines and processes. 
c) Implement BoD approved technology-related policies and ensure that an effective 
information security awareness program is implemented throughout the organization. 
d) Periodically inform BoD on the latest developments on cyber security action plan its 
implementation status and a summary report on major threats and attacks faced by the 
institution and their estimated impact on its operations.  
e) Ensure that the documented Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) are in place and 
are effectively followed in letter and spirit in all areas of technology operations.   
f) Ensure capacity building of the IT personnel to achieve desired service delivery and 
operational excellence.   
g) Select technology solutions that can meet strategic requirements within optimum 
resources. 
h) Ensure that an effective mechanism is in place to monitor completion of technology 
projects and adequate resources are available to complete these projects.  

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
10 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
i) Identify, measure, monitor, and control the risks associated with technology-related 
outsourcing arrangements including cloud services. 
j) Develop, conduct and maintain Disaster Recovery & Business Continuity Plans and 
document their testing in line with the policy approved by the board.  
k) Identify resources gap (people, process & technology) and take appropriate steps to fill 
the gaps. 
1.5 Organizational Structure 
1.5.1 Board IT Committee 
a) A Board IT Committee shall be constituted in all FI(s) except foreign banks, DFIs and 
Microfinance Banks. However, Microfinance Banks doing Branchless Banking (BB) 
operations shall also setup a Board IT Committee.  
 
b) The Board IT Committee shall have a minimum of three (03) directors as its members, 
one of whom shall be an independent director and at least one member shall have 
relevant qualification or experience of IT.  
 
c) The committee shall be mainly responsible for advising and reporting to the board on the 
status of technology activities and digital initiatives in the FI(s). These reports shall 
enable the board to make decisions without having to be involved in routine activities.  
 
d) The committee shall review IT and Digital strategies and relevant policies before 
submission to the board. 
e) The committee shall ensure that risk management strategies are designed and 
implemented to achieve resilience, such as the ability to effectively respond to wide-
scale disruptions, including cyber attacks and attacks on multiple critical infrastructure 
sectors. 
f) The committee shall receive periodic updates from IT Steering Committee to monitor all 
technology-related projects approved by the board. 
 
g) The committee shall ensure that technology procurements are aligned with the IT 
strategy approved by the board.  
 
h) If deem necessary, the committee may seek expert opinion from independent sources. 
1.5.2 IT Steering Committee 
a) The terms of reference of IT Steering Committee shall be approved by the Board IT 
Committee.  
 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
11 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
b) The committee shall be formulated with senior officials from different functions including 
IT, information security, risk management, compliance, operations and business 
segments. 
 
c) The committee shall assist the senior management in implementing IT and digital 
strategies approved by the BoD and shall also play an advisory role to the senior 
management in all technology-related matters. 
 
d) The committee shall monitor implementation of all technology-related projects. 
 
e) The committee shall ensure that IT procurement is in line with the business plan.  
 
f) Ensure that the outsourcing to Cloud Service Providers (CSPs) is conducted in line with 
the Service Level Agreement. 
 
g) The committee shall, among other things, be responsible to ensure an efficient IT 
operating environment that supports the institution's goals and objectives. 
 
h) The committee may also review and determine the adequacy of the FI(s)’ training plan 
including information/cyber security training for the staff. 
 
1.5.3 IT Management Structure 
a) The enterprise-wide IT organizational structure shall commensurate with the size, scale, 
business objectives and nature of business activities carried out by the FI(s). 
 
b) The head of information security/CISO shall be responsible for management and 
mitigation of information/cyber security risks across the enterprise and devising 
strategies to monitor and address current and emerging risks. 
 
c) The head of information security /CISO shall be independent of the technology function 
to avoid any conflict of interest.  
 
1.6  Policies, Standards and Procedures 
a) The FI(s) shall formulate technology policy framework which shall be reviewed and 
updated at-least after every three (03) years. This framework, at a minimum, shall cover 
the following areas: 
 
i) 
Information/cyber Security 
ii) 
Services delivery & operations management 
iii) 
Project management, acquisition, development & implementation of technology 
solutions/systems 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
12 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
iv) 
Business Continuity and Disaster Recovery 
1.7   Management Information System (MIS) 
a) The BoD shall put in place an appropriate MIS to oversee the implementation of IT 
strategy and business plan, exception from board-approved IT policies and progress on 
major IT projects. The format/ contents of this MIS shall be the part of policy which shall 
be approved by the BoD. 
 
b) The management shall formulate an appropriate MIS to monitor the implementation of 
“IT governance and risk management framework”. This MIS shall be the part of 
procedures to be approved by the management. 
 
1.8   Capacity Building/Training 
To ensure that an adequate training program is in place for IT personnel, it is essential to 
establish a process to identify material skill gaps of staff responsible for technology-related 
functions. FI(s) may encourage and where appropriate, facilitate their staff to acquire relevant 
professional qualifications. The FI(s) shall ensure:- 
a) That hiring and training process are governed by appropriate policies and procedures.  
 
b) That staff members have the expertise necessary to perform their jobs and achieve 
institutional goals & objectives. 
 
c) Developing training programs for major new technologies before their deployment.  
 
d) That employees are encouraged to obtain well-recognized professional certifications in 
order to support the business/technology objectives. 
 
e) That staff, with privileged system access or having sensitive business functions, shall 
receive additional and specific information security training. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
13 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
2. INFORMATION SECURITY 
Information Security (IS) has become a critical business function and an essential component of 
governance and management affecting all aspects of the business environment. Effective IS 
controls are necessary to ensure the confidentiality, integrity, availability, durability and quality of 
technology resources and associated information/data. These assets shall be adequately 
protected from unauthorized access, deliberate misuse or fraudulent modification, insertion, 
deletion, substitution, suppression or disclosure. To achieve these objectives, FI(s) shall 
establish an IS program to manage the risks identified through their assessment, commensurate 
with the sensitivity of the information and the complexity of their information security risk profile. 
Management may consider a variety of policies, procedures, technical controls and adopt 
measures that appropriately address identified risks. 
2.1  Information/Cyber Security Management Framework   
An information/cyber security management framework shall be developed3 to manage 
information/cyber security risks in a systematic and consistent manner. The framework, at 
minimum, shall include:-  
a) Identification and prioritization of critical information system assets;  
b) Risk management process including risk identification, risk assessment and risk 
treatment  
c) Security controls implementation 
 
d) Cyber security action plan to proactively address the likely cyber attacks in order to 
anticipate, withstand, detect, and respond to cyber attacks in line with international 
standards and best practices. 
e) Incident reporting 
f) Security requirement & testing 
g) Risk monitoring & reporting 
h) Threat intelligence & industry collaboration 
2.2   Identification and prioritization of Information System Assets  
a) FI(s) shall adequately protect critical information system assets from unauthorized 
access, misuse or fraudulent modification, insertion, deletion, substitution, suppression 
or disclosure. 
 
b) FI(s) shall formulate a policy on information system asset protection in which, criticality 
of information system assets shall be identified and ascertained in order to develop 
appropriate plans to protect them.  
                                                          
3 If no such framework exists, FIs shall develop the same. For FIs which already have such frameworks, 
the same may be updated accordingly. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
14 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
2.3 Information Security Risk Management  
FIs shall institute the following components of risk management for the technology and 
infrastructure security that commensurate with size, services and complexity of the FIs 
operations:- 
2.3.1 Risk Identification  
a) FI(s) shall annually conduct a risk-based vulnerabilities identification exercise across the 
entire institution covering critical information systems and supporting infrastructure 
assets. 
 
b) On the basis of threats and vulnerabilities, the FI(s) shall formulate a list of all risks that 
may create severe harm and disruption to the operations of FI(s).  
2.3.2 Risk Assessment   
a) After risk identification, the FI(s) shall perform an analysis and quantify the potential 
impact, consequences of vulnerabilities and associated risks identified in the risk 
identification exercise on the overall business and operations. 
 
b) FI(s) shall develop a methodology to assess the impact of the threats to its information 
security environment and prioritize all material information security risks.  
2.3.3 Risk Treatment   
a) FI(s) shall develop and implement risk mitigation and control strategies that are 
consistent with the value of the information system assets and the level of risk tolerance. 
 
b) FI(s) shall give priority to threat and vulnerability pairings with high risk ranking, which 
can cause significant harm or impact to the FI’s operations. 
 
c) When deciding the adoption of alternative controls and security measures, the FI(s) shall 
also keep in view costs and effectiveness of the controls with regard to the risks being 
mitigated. 
 
d) FI(s) shall refrain from implementing and running a system where the threats to the 
safety and soundness of the information systems cannot be adequately controlled. 
 
e) As a risk mitigating measure, the FI(s) may consider taking insurance cover for various 
insurable risks, including recovery and restoration costs. 
2.4 Security Controls Implementation 
2.4.1 Asset Classification and Control 
The FI(s) shall maintain an inventory of all information assets and identify the information 
owners, who shall be responsible to ensure confidentiality, integrity and protection of these 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
15 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
assets. Further, the management shall implement an information classification strategy in 
accordance with the degree of sensitivity and criticality of information assets. Moreover, the 
FI(s) shall develop guidelines and definitions for each classification and define an appropriate 
set of controls and procedures for information protection in accordance with the classification 
scheme. In addition, the FI(s) shall establish secure processes for disposal and destruction of 
sensitive information in both paper and electronic media.  
2.4.2 Physical and Environmental Protection 
Physical security measures shall be in place to protect IT facilities and equipment from damage 
or unauthorized access. Critical information processing facilities shall be housed in secure areas 
such as data centers and network equipment rooms with appropriate security barriers and entry 
controls. Access to these areas shall be restricted to authorized personnel only and the access 
rights shall be reviewed and updated regularly. The FI(s) shall consider environmental threats 
when selecting the locations of data centers. Further, physical and environmental controls shall 
be implemented to monitor environmental conditions which can adversely affect the operation of 
information processing facilities. Moreover, FI (s) shall take adequate measures to protect 
equipment from power failures and electrical supply fluctuations.  
2.4.3 Security Administration and Monitoring 
The FI(s) shall put in place a security administration function and set formal procedures for 
administering the allocation of access rights to system resources and application systems and 
monitoring the use of system resources to detect any unusual or unauthorized activities. 
Further, FI(s) shall employ the "least privilege" principle throughout IT operations. Moreover, 
individuals with systems and security administrator roles and privileges shall have no 
transactional authority.  
2.4.4 Authentication and Access Control 
The FI(s) shall have an effective process to manage user authentication and access control. For 
this purpose, appropriate user authentication mechanism commensurate with the classification 
of information to be accessed shall be selected. Users, who can access internal systems, shall 
be required to accept/acknowledge an Acceptable-Use Policy (AUP) document before using a 
system. Staff assigned a security management function shall not perform other duties which can 
create any conflict of interest.  
2.4.5 System Security 
The FI(s) shall put in place, at a minimum, following controls and security requirements to 
safeguard operating systems, software and databases:- 
a) Definition of a set of access privilege for different groups of users and access to data 
and programs. 
b) Prohibition on installation of unlicensed software. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
16 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
c) Installation of updated versions of software. 
d) Secure configuration of hardware, operating systems, software, applications, databases 
and servers with all unnecessary services and programs disabled or removed. 
e) Adequate documentation of all configurations and settings of operating systems, 
software, databases and servers. 
f) Adequate logging and monitoring of systems and user activities to detect irregularities 
and secure protection of logs from manipulation. 
2.4.6 Network Security 
a) The FI(s) shall evaluate and implement appropriate controls relative to the complexity of 
their network. Further, the FI(s) shall deploy an effective mechanism to monitor security 
policy violations and atypical activities on their network. 
b) The FI(s) shall consider the criticality, network protocols, performance requirements and 
trustworthiness in determining the network security controls appropriate to the 
operations of the institution and each of the security domain. 
c) The FI(s) shall create backup of all device configurations on regular basis. 
2.4.7 Remote Access 
The FI(s) shall establish control procedures covering approval process on user requests; 
authentication controls for remote access to networks, host data and/or systems; protection of 
equipment and devices; logging and monitoring of all remote access communications and 
provision of more stringent security controls (i.e., data encryption, two-factor authentication 
process). 
2.4.8 Encryption 
The FI(s) shall ensure encryption at database level, storage level and during network 
transmission as per the classification and sensitivity of the data. 
2.5 Cyber Security Action Plan4 
The FI(s) shall formulate cyber security action plan in order to anticipate, withstand, detect and 
respond to cyber attacks in line with international standards and best practices.5 The FI(s) shall 
implement appropriate controls to prevent any cyber security incident depending on the size and 
complexity of their information/cyber security environment keeping in view the following broader 
parameters:- 
                                                          
4 This section shall supersede earlier instructions issued vide BPRD Circular No. 07of June 22, 2016 titled 
“Prevention against Cyber Attacks”. 
 
5 Instructions in this section are specifically addressing external interfaces/connections of the FIs. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
17 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
a) A sound governance framework with strong leadership is essential for effective 
enterprise-wide cyber security management. Board and senior management-level 
engagement along with a clear chain of accountability is critical to the success of FI(s)’ 
cyber security action plan. 
 
b) Developing and implementing a robust cyber security awareness program and ensuring 
that end-users are aware of the importance of protecting sensitive information and the 
risks of mishandling information. 
 
c) The level of sophistication of technical controls employed by individual FI(s) is contingent 
on that FI(s) individual situation. 
 
d) Establish written procedures to allow access to the vendors on sensitive data/information 
and systems. 
 
e) Implement automated solutions to monitor and proactively track all types of cyber 
attacks. 
 
f) Incorporate a consistent and comparable approach for selecting and specifying security 
controls for computer systems. 
 
g) Develop and implement internal assessment methods/procedures for determining 
security control effectiveness. 
 
h) Deploy multi-layer security model including firewalls, secure sign-on, dual authentication 
with triangulation of access and real-time security event monitoring. 
2.6 Incident Reporting 
a. The FI(s) shall ensure that MIS on incidents, logs, breaches etc. are regularly reviewed 
by the Senior Management and significant incidents are submitted for review to the IT 
Steering Committee on a regular basis. 
 
b. The FI(s) shall report to Banking Policy & Regulation Department (BPRD), SBP within 
forty eight (48) hours after the incident6 all established information/cyber security 
breaches and related incidents involving financial loss, stealing of confidential data and 
major disruption in the banking system or communication channel resulting in non 
availability of banking services for customers for more than two (02) hours  
2.7 Security Requirements and Testing 
a) The FI(s) shall establish a comprehensive testing program to validate the effectiveness 
of its information security environment on a regular basis. The results of the testing 
                                                          
6 for reporting template, refer to Annexure-I  PSD Circular No. 03 of 2015 available at 
http://www.sbp.org.pk/psd/2015/C3-Annexure-A.pdf 
 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
18 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
program shall be used by the FI(s) to support the improvement in their Information/cyber 
security. Where applicable, these tests shall include both internal and external 
stakeholders such as business line management, incident & crisis response teams and 
any other relevant departments/functions. Further, the FI(s) shall also ensure that the all 
production data is properly masked in the test environment involving any external party, 
however, for internal testing purposes, appropriate data masking may be done based on 
the criticality of data. 
b) Keeping in view the complexities of operations, the FI(s) shall, at least  employ any or 
combination of following testing methodologies on periodical basis, while periodicity of 
testing shall be defined in the policy:- 
i) 
Vulnerability assessment (VA). FI(s) shall perform vulnerability assessments to 
identify and assess security vulnerabilities in their systems and processes. The 
FI(s) shall also perform subsequent validation test to assess that the gaps 
identified during VA have been properly filled in.  
ii) 
Scenario-based testing. FI(s)’ response, resumption and recovery plans shall 
be subject to periodic review and testing. Tests shall address an appropriately 
broad scope of scenarios, including simulation of extreme but plausible cyber 
attacks. Further, the tests shall be designed to challenge the assumptions of 
response, 
resumption 
and 
recovery 
practices 
including 
governance 
arrangements and communication plans. FI(s) shall also conduct exercises to 
test the ability of their staff and processes to respond to unfamiliar scenarios, 
with a view to achieve strong operational resilience. 
iii) 
Penetration tests. FI(s) shall carry out periodic penetration tests to identify 
vulnerabilities that may affect their systems, networks, people or processes. 
Penetration tests on internal systems shall also be conducted at the time of major 
update and deployment of the software/system.   
iv) 
Quality Assurance (QA). FI(s) shall ensure that a proper and independent QA 
function exists and operates to testify in-house developments for any vulnerability 
that may pose a risk. 
2.8 Risk Monitoring and Reporting  
a) The FI(s) shall maintain a risk register to facilitate the monitoring and reporting of risks 
by prioritizing and closely monitoring high risk activities with regular reporting on the 
actions that have been taken to mitigate them. Further, the FI(s) shall update the risk 
register periodically and develop a monitoring and review process for continuous 
assessment and treatment of risks.7 
 
                                                          
7 For this purpose, template for Risk Control & Self Assessment issued vide BPRD Circular # 04 dated 
May 20, 2014 available at http://www.sbp.org.pk/bprd/2014/C4-Annexure-1.pdf may be used accordingly. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
19 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
b) For risk reporting to management, the FI(s) shall develop IT risk reporting methodologies 
to highlight systems, processes or infrastructure that have high risk exposure. In 
determining the IT risk reporting methodology, the FI(s) may consider risk events, 
regulatory requirements and audit observations. 
 
c) The FI(s) shall evaluate the risk processes in place through testing methodologies and 
risk review of controls. The result of these exercises shall be duly reviewed by the 
management and major risks shall be reported to IT steering committee.  
2.9 Threat Intelligence and Industry Collaboration 
The FI(s) shall: 
a) Gather and interpret information about relevant cyber threats arising out from the FI(s) 
participants, services and utility providers and other FI(s). In this context, relevant cyber 
threat intelligence may include information that may trigger cyber attacks on any entity 
within the FI(s)’ ecosystem. 
 
b) Ensure that cyber threat intelligence is shared with relevant staff with responsibility for 
the mitigation of cyber risks at the strategic, tactical and operational levels through a 
secure method. 
 
c) Use a platform within the industry for the purpose of collecting and exchanging timely 
information that may facilitate in detection, response, resumption and recovery of FI(s) 
systems following a cyber attack, breach or incident. 
 
d) Identify key lessons learnt from cyber events that have occurred within and outside the 
organization in order to improve their resilience capabilities and prevention mechanisms. 
 
e) Monitor technological developments and keep abreast with new cyber risk management 
processes that can effectively counter existing and new forms of cyber threats. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
20 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
3. IT SERVICES DELIVERY & OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT 
Management shall be aware of and mitigate risks associated with technology operations. Many 
operations have significant risk factors that shall be addressed through effective management 
and control. To many FI(s), effective support and delivery from technology operations has 
become vital to the performance of most of their critical business lines. 
3.1 IT Service Management Framework 
The FI(s) shall put in place a robust IT service management framework for managing and 
supporting IT systems. The framework shall comprise the Preventive Maintenance Plan, 
Incident & Problem Management, Patch Management, Capacity Management processes and 
procedures for building and maintaining data centers.    
3.2 Preventive Maintenance Plan (PMP) 
Preventive maintenance may help in smooth and efficient functioning of IT operations, prolong 
the life of equipment and reduce the overall maintenance costs. Therefore, The FI(s) shall 
formulate preventive maintenance plan on the basis of following principles: 
a) Before organizing preventive maintenance plan, FI(s) need to set goals that are to be 
achieved by using the system.  
b) Create a list of all IT assets along with their full details.  
c) Determine priority assets keeping in view the sensitivity of operations they perform. 
Thereafter, FI(s) shall determine that the performance of assets is in line with the 
operational goals.  
d) Keeping in view the cost effectiveness, the FI(s) shall prioritize all IT assets, which 
shall be included in Preventive Maintenance Plan (PMP).   
e) The FI(s) shall create a schedule for preventive maintenance plan for all the 
prioritized assets. Further, the IT management shall regularly review the results of 
the PMP.  
f) The FI(s) shall focus on the capacity building of all the staff involved in the process of 
PMP.  
3.3 Incident and Problem Management 
The objective of the incident management is to restore the service as quickly as possible to 
meet Service Level Agreements. The process is primarily aimed at the user level. On the other 
hands, problem management deals with solving the underlying cause of one or more incidents. 
In order to have effective incident management, FI(s) shall: 
a) Continuously develop problem and error controls. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
21 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
b) Formulate a tiered support structure, where the team understands different levels of 
tiers. 
 
c) Formulate a continual service improvement program that measures efficiency and 
effectiveness through KPIs aligned to organizational goals and objectives. 
 
d) Assign clear and documented roles and responsibilities within IT in terms of desired 
outcomes. 
 
For effective problem management, the FI (s) shall ensure that:- 
a) The problem management process has well-defined and relevant KPIs. 
 
b) IT function signs an internal Service Level Agreement (SLA) with business units for 
system availability & performance requirements, capacity for growth and level of 
support provided to the users. 
 
c) Necessary arrangements are in place for backup of power supply for all areas 
related to IT services delivery, support and IT operations. 
 
d) Problems and errors are regularly (and properly) classified and identified 
 
e) Roles and responsibilities are documented in terms of desired outcomes. 
 
3.4 Patch Management 
Patch Management is a practice designed to proactively prevent the exploitation of 
vulnerabilities on IT devices. The FI(s) shall establish procedures to test patches in a 
segregated environment, and to install them when appropriate. The procedures shall include the 
identification, categorization, prioritization of security patches and their testing processes.  
3.5 Capacity Planning 
a) The FI(s) shall initiate capacity planning to address internal factors (growth, mergers, 
acquisitions, new product lines and the implementation of new technologies) and 
external factors (shift in customer preferences, competitor capability or regulatory or 
market requirements). 
 
b) The FI(s) shall monitor technology resources for capacity planning including platform 
processing speed, core storage for each platform's central processing unit, data storage, 
and voice/data communication bandwidth. 
 
c) Capacity planning shall be closely integrated with the budgeting and strategic planning 
processes. It shall also address personnel issues including staff size, appropriate 
training and staff succession plans. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
22 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
3.6 Data Center 
The FI(s) shall formulate procedures in line with best international standards for building and 
maintaining data center structures and operations. 
3.7 User Support/Help Desk 
The FI(s) may create users’ help desk to ensure that they perform their job functions in an 
efficient and effective manner. The Help Desk may record and track incoming problem reports, 
being handled by live operators or automated systems. Further, FI(s) may also define Key 
performance indicators (KPI) for the resolution of different problems / issues. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
23 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
4. ACQUISITION & IMPLEMENTATION OF IT SYSTEMS 
The critical role of technology in financial institutions requires the use of appropriate 
development, acquisition and maintenance standards. Development and acquisition refers to an 
organization's ability to identify, acquire, install and maintain appropriate information technology 
systems. The process includes the internal development of software applications or systems 
and the purchase or acquisition of hardware, software, or services from third parties. The 
development, acquisition and maintenance process includes numerous risks. Effective project 
management manages the possibility of loss resulting from inadequate processes, personnel or 
systems. Losses can result from errors, fraud or an inability to deliver products or services, 
maintain a competitive position or manage information. 
4.1. Technology Projects Management Framework 
The FI(s) shall:  
a) Establish a framework for management of major technology-related projects. This 
framework shall, among other things, specify the project management methodology to 
be adopted. The methodology shall at a minimum cover structure, roles and 
responsibilities of the staff, activity breakdown, budgeting of time and resources, 
milestones, check points, key dependencies, quality assurance, change management, 
risk assessment and approvals. 
 
b) Establish a Project Management Office (PMO) to promote sound management practices 
and principles based on the size and complexity of technology-related projects. Further, 
PMO shall be responsible to maintain centralized record of all technology related 
projects, monitor and report the status of these projects to the IT steering committee on 
periodical basis. 
 
c) Adopt and implement a full project life cycle methodology governing the process of 
developing, implementing and maintaining major computer systems. In general, this 
shall involve phases of project initiation, feasibility study, business requirement 
definition, system design, program development, system and acceptance testing, 
training, implementation, operation and maintenance. The project life cycle methodology 
shall include roles and responsibilities for the project team and the deliverables from 
each phase. 
 
d) Engage an independent party to conduct a quality assurance review of major technology 
projects after every five (05) years. 
4.2 System Development and Acquisition Framework 
The FI(s) shall assess and mitigate operational risks associated with the development or 
acquisition of software by using a Secure System Development Life Cycle (SDLC) or similar 
methodology appropriate for their specific technology environment. The extent or use of the 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
24 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
SDLC shall depend on the size and complexity of the institution and the type of development 
activities performed.   
The system development and acquisition framework shall at least cover the following aspects:- 
4.2.1 System Development 
Software development projects can be completed by the FI in-house, through outsourcing or by 
a combined approach. To manage such type of projects, the FI(s) shall ensure that: 
a) Project management standards are in place to address issues such as need 
assessment, risk management procedures and project approval authorities. 
 
b) System control standards include an application's functional, security, and automated 
control features. 
 
c) Quality assurance standards address issues such as validation of project assumptions, 
adherence to project standards and testing of a product's performance. 
 
d) Security and vulnerability assessment of software modules is conducted. 
 
e) An escrow arrangement exists in cases where core applications are developed by 
vendors but the source codes were not released to the FI(s). 
4.2.2 System Acquisition 
a) For major IT acquisitions, FI(s) shall develop/update technology procurement policy 
covering, at least, the following areas:-  
i) 
Formulation of RFP and Business Requirement Document (BRD) 
ii) 
Roles and responsibilities of relevant stakeholders  
iii) 
Approval matrix of RFP and BRD 
b) The technology procurement policy shall also include types of technology assets for both 
hardware & software, types of vendors for hardware & software, selection criteria for 
vendors, acquisition process, payment procedures & monitoring, delivery assurance & 
verification process, technical vetting requirement and need assessment. 
 
c) The FI(s) shall ensure that functional, operational and regulatory requirements are 
identified and recorded in Request-For-Proposals (RFP) or Invitations-To-Tender (ITT) in 
the bid solicitation process. Public sector FI(s) shall also follow PPRA rules for 
procurement of any software or hardware solutions or consultancy services. 
 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
25 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
d) The RFP and BRD for any new technology acquisition shall be reviewed to ascertain 
comprehensiveness of the documents, their alignment with IT strategy & business 
objectives and technical alignments with emerging trends and technologies. 
 
e) FI(s) may obtain expert consultancy/ advisory services for the formulation of 
RFP/BRD/Procurement process, where it deems necessary, provided they record 
reasons and rationale for the same. 
 
f) FI(s) shall conduct a system (hardware, software and services) selection analysis to 
ensure that user and business requirements are met, expected service levels are 
properly achieved as per contract agreements and all applicable legal/regulatory 
requirements are complied with. 
 
g) FI(s) shall undergo a transparent and competitive process of acquisitions in major 
procurements. Whenever signing up for direct contracting is required, it should be fairly 
justified based on the requirements (such as technical grounds, urgency and other 
matters).  
 
h) The procurement process shall b e managed by an independent unit and governed by IT 
Steering Committee for different scope / level / size of procurements.  
 
i) FI(s) shall form an appropriate forum/structure to monitor the process of technology 
related procurements. 
 
j) FI(s) shall also ensure that vendors deliver hardware/ software as per terms and 
conditions set in the contract/agreement. The delivery of technology assets shall be 
assessed against purchase orders, prepared in light of RFPs/ BRDs, and the same shall 
be signed off by the respective departments. 
4.2.3 System Testing 
The FI(s) shall: 
a) Ensure that only properly tested and approved systems are promoted to the production 
environment.  
 
b) Carry out system and User Acceptance Testing (UAT) in an environment separate from 
the production environment.  
 
c) Ensure that production data is not used in development or acceptance testing unless the 
data has been desensitized and prior approval from the information owner has been 
obtained.  
 
d) Carry out performance testing of newly developed critical systems to ensure effective 
and smooth operation before deploying the same in production environment. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
26 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
 
e) Conduct system testing using documented test plans encompassing all predetermined 
data or processing problems and business scenarios. 
 
f) Ensure that adequate test scenarios are formulated and sufficiently tested in UAT.  
 
g) Confirm that test activities are successful and recorded before the modified programs is 
transferred to the production environment. 
 
h) Ensure that system development personnel are prohibited from having access to 
production systems. 
4.2.4 System Migration 
The FI(s) shall: 
a) Establish a secured library or quarantine area for program pending migration to the 
production environment, which are accessible by the personnel, who have performed the 
migration process. 
 
b) Put in place an appropriate procedure to verify changes and to ensure that no 
unauthorized changes have been made. 
 
c) Implement version controls to ensure that only authorized programs are migrated to 
quarantine and production environments. 
 
d) Archive old versions of source codes with a clear indication of the precise date, time and 
all necessary information. 
 
4.2.5 System Documentation 
The FI(s) shall: 
a) Formulate procedures on system development and all related documentation including 
development, testing, trainings, production, operational administration and user 
manuals. 
 
b) Maintain the type and level of documentation for each project phase including project 
requests, feasibility studies, project plans, testing plans etc. 
 
c) Establish system documentation including system concept narratives, data flow charts 
and database specifications. 
 
d) Establish application documentation including application descriptions, programming 
flowcharts, work flow processes, operations and user instructions. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
27 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
 
e) Define roles and responsibilities of officers to ensure that all changes to system, 
application and configuration documentation are made according to prescribed 
standards. 
 
f) Control access to documentation libraries with appropriate library and version controls. 
 
g) Ensure that complete and updated system documentation of such applications is 
available and are secured against unauthorized access. 
 
4.2.6 Change Management  
a) FI(s) shall establish a change management process to ensure that changes to 
production systems are approved, implemented and reviewed in a controlled manner. 
 
b) The change management process shall apply to changes pertaining to system and 
security configurations, patches for hardware devices and software updates. 
 
c) FI(s) shall perform a risk and impact analysis of the change request in relation to existing 
infrastructure, network, up-stream and downstream systems. 
 
d)  FI(s) shall adequately test the impending change and ensure that it is accepted by users 
prior to the migration of the changed modules to the production system. The FI(s) shall 
develop and document appropriate test plans for the impending change. Further, they 
shall obtain test results with user sign-offs prior to the migration. 
 
e) FI(s) shall establish a rollback plan to revert to a former version of the system or 
application if a problem is encountered during or after the deployment. The FI(s) shall 
establish alternative recovery options to address situations where a change does not 
allow the FI to revert to a prior status.  
 
f) FI(s) shall ensure that the logging facility is enabled to record activities that are 
performed during the migration process. 
4.2.7 Post-Implementation Review 
For critical projects/systems, the FI(s) shall: 
a) Conduct a post implementation review at the end of a project to validate the application's 
operational performance. 
 
b) Assess the relative success of the project by comparing planned and actual cost, 
benefits and completion time. 
 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
28 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
c) Record reasons in a post implementation evaluation report if the planned objectives do 
not materialize. 
 
d) Present post implementation evaluation report to senior management highlighting 
operational or project management deficiencies (if any). 
 
4.3 Outsourcing of IT Services 
The FI(s) shall define the business requirements for the functions or activities to be outsourced. 
All IT activities to be outsourced shall be governed under the instructions conveyed through 
BP&RD Circular No 9 dated 13th July, 2007 as amended from time to time.  
4.4 Cloud Computing 
4.4.1 Due Diligence of the Cloud Service Provider (CSP) 
When evaluating the feasibility of outsourcing to a CSP, FI(s) shall keep in view the legal, 
regulatory & compliance risks, cost effectiveness and quality of services etc. Further, FI(s) shall 
carry out due-diligence of the prospective CSPs including their competence, business structure, 
experience, track record, financial strength, physical security/internal controls placed by the 
CSP.   
 
The board shall formulate a comprehensive policy on due-diligence and risk management of 
CSP based on the following parameters before allowing services on cloud:- 
 
a) Data ownership: The FI (s) shall be ultimate responsible for the security of the data.  
b) Data Separation/Isolation: FI’s data must be segregated from other data held by the 
CSP. 
c) Security, Privacy & Confidentiality: The CSP or any other entity shall not have the 
right to view or access the information being routed or stored with the CSP. The sole 
discretion of access to all such information/data/records/reports etc shall be with the 
FI(s).  
d) Audit & Access Rights: A CSP shall provide access of all arrangements to FI(s) and 
SBP.  
e) Review, Monitoring and Control: A CSP shall demonstrate compliance with all legal 
and contractual requirements.  
f) Encryption and Key Management: FI(s) confidential or sensitive data must be 
appropriately protected. Keys used for appropriate encryption adopted by the FI(s) shall 
be managed securely.  
g) Service Legal Agreement (SLA): All arrangements shall be properly documented in the 
SLA between the CSP and the FI(s). 
h) Business Continuity Plan: FI(s) shall have adequate plan to resume business due to 
any disruption of services through CSP.  

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
29 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
i) Exit Strategy: FI (s) shall put in place adequate procedures to exit from the cloud 
computing arrangement in case of non compliance of terms and condition of the 
agreement by CSP. These shall also be made the part of agreement with CSP.  
 
4.4.2 Permissible Cloud Computing Arrangements 
The Board IT Committee shall approve all cloud-based outsourcing arrangements in line with 
the policy approved by the board keeping in view the following:- 
a) Given the potential issues related to business operations, confidentiality of customer 
data and legal/regulatory compliance, FI(s) shall only use cloud services for non-core 
operations and business support processes (e.g., communication tools, office 
productivity, collaboration tools, HR-related services, procurement functions, Inventory 
management etc.) 
 
b) For all types of cloud services including Software as a Service (SaaS), Platform as a 
Service (PaaS) and Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS),  the CSPs shall be located in 
Pakistan and all physical servers and services (data centers and allied infrastructure) 
shall reside and operate from Pakistan. 
 
c) Core banking applications/services/operations and business processes used to process 
and store customer/borrower data/information shall not be placed under cloud-based 
outsourcing arrangements.  
 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
30 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
5. BUSINESS CONTINUITY AND DISASTER RECOVERY 
Financial institutions could face the suspension of critical operations due to natural disasters, 
terrorist attacks, environmental incidents, computer problems, and other causes and hence 
need to secure business continuity by formulating action plans in advance to ensure quick 
recovery. Business Continuity Planning (BCP) is a comprehensive enterprise-wide process that 
defines how FI(s) respond to and recover from business disruptions in case of a disaster, 
enabling an FI(s) to continue services to the customers and stakeholders alike.  
5.1. Business Continuity and Disaster Recovery Framework 
a) The FI(s) shall develop a comprehensive business continuity plan (BCP) as part of the 
business continuity planning process. 
 
b) The BCP shall be based on the size and complexity of the FI(s) and shall be consistent 
with its overall business strategy.  
 
c) The goal of the BCP shall be to minimize financial losses to the institution, serve 
customers with minimal disruptions and mitigate the negative effects of disruptions on 
business operations. 
 
d) Keeping in view the size, nature and complexity of business operations and IT systems, 
FI(s) shall consider developing built-in redundancies to reduce single points of failure 
which can bring down the entire network.  
 
e) The FI(s) shall maintain standby hardware, software and network components that are 
necessary for fast recovery.  
5.2 Business Continuity Planning Process 
Business continuity planning process includes a Business Impact Analysis (BIA), risk 
assessment, risk management, risk monitoring and testing. 
5.2.1 Business Impact Analysis 
The FI(s) shall: 
a) Assess and prioritize all business functions and processes, including their 
interdependencies, as part of a work flow analysis, 
b) Identify potential impact of business disruptions resulting from uncontrolled, non-specific 
events on the institution's business functions and processes, 
c) Identify legal and regulatory requirements for the FI(s) business functions and 
processes, 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
31 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
d) Estimate maximum allowable downtime as well as the acceptable level of losses, 
associated with business functions and processes and 
e) Estimate recovery time objectives (RTOs), recovery point objectives (RPOs) and 
recovery of the critical path. 
5.2.2 Risk Assessment 
The FI(s) shall:  
a) Evaluate the BIA assumptions using various threat scenarios; 
b) Analyze threats based upon the impact to the institution, its customers and other 
relevant stakeholders; 
c) Prioritize potential business disruptions based on their severity; and 
d) Perform a "gap analysis" to compare existing BCP to the policies and procedures which 
shall be implemented based on prioritized disruptions identified and their resulting 
impact on the FI(s). 
5.2.3. Risk Management 
Risk management is the process of identifying, assessing, and reducing risk to an acceptable 
level through the development, implementation and maintenance of a written, enterprise-wide 
BCP. The BCP shall be based on a comprehensive BIA and risk assessment exercise, reviewed 
and approved by the board at least annually. It shall be documented in a written program and 
disseminated across the FI(s). The BCP shall, among other things, specify the conditions which 
shall prompt implementation of the plan and the process for invoking the BCP and immediate 
steps to be taken during a disruption. The BCP shall be flexible to respond to unanticipated 
threat scenarios and changing internal conditions; focused on the impact of various threats that 
could potentially disrupt operations rather than on specific events; BCP shall be effective in 
minimizing service disruptions and financial loss through the implementation of mitigation 
strategies. 
5.2.4. Risk Monitoring and Testing 
Risk monitoring and testing is the final step in the business continuity planning process. Risk 
monitoring and testing ensures that the institution's business continuity planning process 
remains viable through the: 
a) Incorporation of the BIA and risk assessment into the BCP and testing program; 
b) Development of an enterprise-wide testing program; 
c) Assignment of roles and responsibilities for implementation of the testing program; 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
32 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
d) Completion of annual, or more frequent, tests of the BCP; 
e) Evaluation of the testing program and the test results by senior management and the 
board; 
f) Assessment of the testing program and test results by an independent party; and 
g) Revision of the BCP and testing program based upon changes in business operations, 
audit recommendations and test results. 
5.3 Disaster Recovery 
FI(s) shall achieve high systems availability (or near zero system downtime) for critical systems 
which is associated with maintaining adequate capacity, reliable performance, fast response 
time, scalability and swift recovery capability. Built-in redundancies for single points of failure 
shall be developed and contingency plans shall be tested so that business and operating 
disruptions can be minimized. 
5.3.1. Disaster Recovery Plan 
The FI(s) shall: 
a) Identify and address various types of contingency scenarios, which may be caused 
by system faults, hardware malfunction, operating errors or security incidents and 
total incapacitation of the primary Datacenter. 
 
b) Evaluate the recovery plan and incident response procedures at least annually and 
update them as and when changes to business operations, systems and networks 
occur. 
 
c) Implement replication, rapid backup and recovery capabilities at the individual 
system or application cluster level.  
 
d) Consider inter-dependencies between critical systems in drawing up its recovery 
plan and conducting contingency tests. 
 
e) Define system recovery, business resumption priorities and establish specific 
recovery objectives including Recovery Time Objectives (RTO) and Recovery Point 
Objective (RPO) for IT systems and applications. 
 
f) Establish a recovery site that is geographically separated from the primary site to 
enable the restoration of critical systems and resumption of business operations in 
case of disruption at the primary site. Further, FI (s) shall also address cross-border 
network redundancies (in case of offshore outsourcing arrangements), with 
strategies such as engagement of different network service providers and alternate 
network paths. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
33 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
 
g) The selection of DR specifications shall be made according to the BIA to address the 
identified threats and to meet the recovery objectives. 
5.3.2 Disaster Recovery Testing 
1. The FI(s) shall: 
a) Adopt approved, tested and rehearsed recovery measures. 
 
b) Test and validate, at least annually, the effectiveness of recovery requirements and 
the ability of staff to execute the necessary emergency and recovery procedures. 
 
c) Cover various scenarios in disaster recovery tests including total shutdown/complete 
switchover of the primary site as well as component failure at the individual system 
or application cluster level.  
 
d) Test the recovery dependencies between systems. 
 
e) BCP/DR drills planned with third parties, if any, shall be performed annually. 
 
f) Testing of BCP shall include all aspects and constituents of a bank i.e. people, 
processes and resources (including technology). BCP tests shall ensure that all 
members of the recovery team and relevant staff are aware of the plans. 
 
g) Involve business users in the design and execution of comprehensive test cases to 
verify that recovered systems function properly. 
 
h) Participate in disaster recovery tests that are conducted by its service provider(s), 
including those systems, which are located offshore. 
 
i) Involve the respective business group heads/ unit heads while signing-off test results 
of DR-BCP drills. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
34 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
6. IT AUDIT 
The FI(s) shall plan, manage and monitor rapidly changing technologies to enable them to 
deliver and support new products, services and delivery channels. These changes and the 
increasing reliance on technology make the IT audit coverage essential to an effective overall 
audit program. The audit program shall address technology risks throughout the organization, 
including the areas of IT management, strategic planning, IT operations, physical and 
information security, electronic products and services, systems development & acquisition and 
business continuity planning etc. 
6.1.   IT Audit Program 
The audit function of FI(s) shall ensure that an audit program, governing the IT audit function, is 
approved by the BoD or its Audit Committee, which shall at a minimum, include the following:- 
a) An annual audit plan detailing IT audit's budgeting and planning processes including 
audit goals, schedules, staffing needs and reporting requirements.  
b) A risk assessment process to describe and analyze the risks inherent in a given line 
of business for the determination of scope and frequency of audits.  
c) An IT audit cycle that identifies the frequency of audits based on sound risk 
assessment process; 
d) Audit report format; 
e) Document maintenance and retention policy for IT findings. 
f) Follow-up processes for significant IT audit findings. 
 
6.2   Scope of IT Audit 
The scope of IT audit shall include:- 
a) Identification of weaknesses, providing meaningful recommendations and reviewing 
management's plans for addressing those weaknesses.  
 
b) Reviewing the adequacy of general controls in place covering areas such as IT strategic 
& business planning, IT operations, DR/BCP, IT outsourcing, information security, 
development and acquisitions, ADCs, IT Procurements and Project Management etc. 
 
c) A regular, comprehensive audit of FI(s) arrangements with the CSPs. 
 
d) Application System Review (ASR) to identify, document, test and evaluate the 
application controls to ensure confidentiality, integrity and accuracy of the systems and 
the related data/information.  
6.3   Reporting Methodology 
The audit function shall: 
a) Report the findings, conclusions, recommendations and qualifications or limitations in 
scope with respect to the IT audit. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
 
35 
Enterprise Technology Governance & Risk Management Framework for Financial Institutions 
 
b) Discuss the draft report contents with management in the subject area prior to 
finalization and release of the final report. 
 
c) Ensure that report is signed, dated and distributed according to the format as defined in 
the audit program.  
 
d) Periodically submit a consolidated report to the Audit Committee on the following areas:-  
a. Information/cyber security 
b. IT service delivery and operations 
c. IT outsourcing including cloud services arrangements 
d. IT Project management, acquisition & development 
e. IT procurement 
f. Performance Management 
g. BCP & DRP 
6.4   Post-closing/Monitoring Activities 
a) The audit function shall ensure that senior management approves a procedure to ensure 
timely implementation of audit recommendations. 
 
b) The audit function shall monitor the implementation of management's corrective actions. 
 
c) The audit function shall communicate status of the recommendations to the BoD or Audit 
Committee at least on a quarterly basis. 
 
 

--- PAGE BREAK ---
